oh thanks everyone welcome back who I
had to take a little breather after
um you know just experiencing those
those really rich artworks I mean I kind
of felt like when I when we've been
installing the show I've been kind of
watching the pros progress and uh it's
hypnotizing watching the sculptures just
kind of move and I get really really
really sucked in so I really encourage
everyone to go check it out that was
what I was gonna say that TR is because
these very particular I know like
hypnotizing
I know like atmosphere to it I just
can't I don't know like sometimes I
would just like keep on watching them
and then at some point just wondering if
I should move to the next one so it's
like oh yeah sure okay there's some uh
there's a lot of other things to go
through so I might as well start moving
slowly elsewhere so yeah I think that
that is a yeah it's a very powerful very
complete way of tying together topics
that are not only origin but necessarily
to rethink and reveal and re-weave
um yeah which I think also connects with
what we're gonna experience now yes yes
um you know and I'm definitely gonna be
going to bed tonight with the thought of
what does it feel like to be a
cyanobacteria
[Laughter]
so you know without further Ado um I
know we're running a little bit behind
the schedule today we just have so much
richness for you um
coming up next I'm really excited to
present a talk by Nathan Shafer Nathan
is a new media artist author and special
ed teacher from Alaska he's one of the
founding members of the meme Rider media
team which is an Art Collective founded
in 2000 designing early form internet
memes and manifest.ar the first
International Art Collective making
mobile augmented reality works oh this
is so great after we just looked at some
augmented reality work uh he was
profiled by PBS digital Studios as part
of an online collaboration called the
future in 2014 and he's been shown at
noxious sector projects bow welds bundle
Street Arts Center rhizome the isea
Pratt Museum virtuale switch from
Switzerland out north Contemporary Art
House and the Institute of Contemporary
Art Boston he also contributed chapters
to the first anthology of AR based art
making augmented reality art published
by Springer in 2014 followed by
augmented reality Games 2 augmented
reality and education and
augmented reality in museums tourism and
Heritage
his current work is called winter mute
and it's not augmented uh Alaskan comic
book which he's received a creative
Capital award for just last year
um I won't say too much more because I
know Nathan's gonna talk about it so
I'll leave it I'll leave it at that and
you can experience just in a few minutes
and I'm also you know being over the
moon to say that as a surprise we have
curator Patrick lichty with us who will
be joining the conversation uh
afterwards he is a curator a
collaborator of mine in the past we're
currently working on a show together
actually
um and he's a media reality artist
Creator and theorist of over two decades
who explores how media and mediation
affect our perception of reality he's
best known for his work as an artistic
director of the virtual reality
performance art group's second front
iconic Google it and the animator of the
activist group the Yes Men he's a cal
Arts Herb Alpert fellow and Whitney uh
Whitney biennial exhibitor as part of
the collective RT Mark he's presented
and exhibited internationally and
numerous biennials and triennials um
there's so many I'm telling you Google
him you'll you can't swing a dead cat
without hitting Patrick lick D
um and he's a long time friend of Nathan
and one of the collaborators of
manifest.ar as well
without further Ado here's Nathan and
we'll be back with you afterwards for uh
a brief conversation
my name is Nathan Shafer I'm a New Media
artist special education teacher and
author from Anchorage Alaska
I'm participating in the worlding
protocol show
in the exhibition this is going to be a
talk I'm giving also about Collective
practice and
World building inside of a collective
practice been working
since I was about 13 or 14. as a kid
with Collective practices in Collective
art making and World building
starting with the Dogma one Laboratories
that was 93 94 was in junior high me and
my friend Isaac Boatwright started it up
it was
honestly something closer to just some
art nerd kids that were really
interested
in
making art and we didn't really have
much of an education on what it was we
love the Olympian literature and
Fantasia literature uh we're really into
data and surrealism kind of normal
things that our kids would have gotten
into and we started
building collaborative stories
together by the time we were young
adults in our early 20s
with Joel how old my wife we founded the
meme writer media team which that was
around 99 or 2000.
there's so that was the first I think we
probably wrote manifestos with the Dogma
one Laboratories but it was honestly
just mostly kids having fun and I really
can't find a lot of that old stuff we've
just moved around so much but the meme
Rider media team in 99
we were totally mesmerized by this book
by Richard Dawkins
um called The Selfish Gene where he
invented the term memes in Meme plexes
and mimetics to to describe things
moving between culture the way genetics
do so memes at the time were kind of
this culture jamming thing reality
hacking it was it was um politically
motivated Anarchist kind of art making
disrupting the system kind of stuff we
ended up doing lots of really fun
things as we were as we were World
building we we had all the political
stuff but it started getting
uh
we're into science fiction and
fantasy elements the images I have here
this was a screenshot from one of the
old websites I think it was also off of
Myspace and then one of the first actual
internet memes we
we weren't making internet memes so much
as we were doing interactive art and
installations and things like that we
had a group inside of our Collective
called the Manifest infinity life
extension Foundation that built crionic
suspension devices
um
that one also had a Manifesto so I mean
stuff like here you see um this is
called the brain freeze it's a chronic
neurosuspension device that also made
ice cream
it was good
our media team started we all started
doing our own practice uh Joel and I
were about to finish grad school
I was doing this project called novel
pieces and
I was really into this idea of taking
artwork
or finding artwork that existed only in
science fiction novels just as
descriptions and it didn't exist
anywhere else and so for the displays it
would just be it would look like
conceptual art where viewers would just
read these descriptions and the artwork
would kind of exist in these liminal
spaces between everything
so this is 2007-ish when I was finishing
up that piece and that's when William
Gibson's novel Spook Country came out
and
he started talking a lot about locative
media which is something some of us were
kind of doing I wasn't really calling
myself a new media artist at this time I
was calling myself a speculative media
artist because I was working with with
things that were right on the periphery
of of
being let's say media not necessarily
digital but this one was um Photoshop
images
of artworks that were described inside
of Spook Country uploaded into Google
Maps so before the iPhones were really
becoming a big big thing it was still
sort of new in Mobile augmented reality
apps hadn't launched just yet they were
about to uh one of the pieces I made
there was Archie
which was one of the first augmented
reality projects I actually made with
Christopher manzione who went to school
with us and he had started something
called the virtual public art project
uh eventually since I was making this
kind of stuff
one of the or the founder of manifest AR
Mark score asked me to join them and it
was manifest air as this International
Collective of mobile augmented reality
artists that we're all working together
this was one of our group shows called
occupy Mayday it was all over the world
all these little spots were places where
we had uh shows up
this was coming towards the end of
manifest AR working together
in 2010
they wrote the Manifest AR Manifesto and
I signed on to that it was kind of a fun
group to be doing stuff with we were
showing all over the world all sorts of
fun stuff everybody was doing little
festivals in the areas where they lived
so unseen sculptures was in Australia
and Christopher was doing the virtual
public art project in my neck of the
woods in Anchorage I was doing winter
mood and I had really really started
getting into building narratives
augmented narratives using AR I was
working on a piece called non-local this
is just a bunch of uh science fiction
stories uploaded
into
um the layer app which is now defunct
there would be sometimes little
Publications that went with it
um
it ended up turning into lots of
different things
uh I started working a lot more with
these narratives
I built something for the Anchorage
Centennial where we had
a bunch of author for authors write
historical fiction set in Anchorage
this one was written by Angela yatlin
Gonzalez a koi Khan writer about didina
summer Fish Camp the denina or the
indigenous group in South Central Alaska
Anchorage area where I live
and so we use the augmented reality laid
over top of these illustrations this is
one of the first times I actually worked
with comic books too but um we use the
AR to you know do the videos and loading
the stuff but one of the cool things we
did was we actually used the augmented
reality to translate
the denina language into English so a
lot of these words inside here would
translate
um I'm gonna run out of time if I talk
about everything so I'm gonna try to get
through this one of the the last story
in Anchorage narratives was written by
Adema labello one of my good friends
he's a Yoruba playwright who had gotten
political Asylum
in Anchorage
so his story was set in 2015.
it was about an asylate in Mountain View
Anchorage which is the most ethnically
diverse neighborhood in the United
States and it's this North Anchorage is
kind of this fascinating place and I I
live in North Anchorage I teach in North
Anchorage I graduated from high school
in North Anchorage just this really
interesting place to to live and work
um anyway edema's first story that he
wrote for Anchorage narratives
was actually a Yoruba man in a glitchen
at the Baskin man meet in Mountain View
and they realize they're both scientists
and they decide they want to bring
a bunch of Mega fauna from the place to
see Nara back to life and they do that
and there's an accident and they both
end up with superpowers they get from
these animals and they don't know what
to do so they decide they're going to
become superheroes and fight crime and
Mountain View and this is the first
draft of the story of demola wrote
in the humanities forum who was funding
the project wanted an asylum story so we
had to rewrite it and um do a whole
another set of things he did something a
little more autobiographical and uh the
illustrations I put with it in the
magazine were all Census Data data
visualization stuff then we use the
augments to
kind of go with
the the data visualizations
um that story is important because it's
going to come back when we start making
comic books with the Lucas the the fish
head soup Comics group that I'm working
with but before we get there inside the
exhibition going on in San Francisco
right now
is three augments from the dirigibles of
Denali project that I started with
Patrick lichty in 2014 ended up bringing
in a bunch of other folks
12 13 14 more people on top of that but
the essence of dirigibles of Denali
was there was three dumb cities that
were literally proposed to be built in
Alaska
shortly after Alaska became a state so
all these Americans and white people
were flooding into Alaska and they were
planning a futuristic world in in the
state
the weather was kind of a hindrance so
they imagined living in these dumb
cities and traveling via dirigibles or
blimps around Alaska
the three Dome cities were Arctic cities
Seward success in Denali City Arctic
City wasn't located anywhere
specifically it was just sort of a style
created by architect friado
Seward success was um and just supposed
to be right north of Anchorage and
Denali city was actually on the
foothills
uh in Denali National Park looking up at
the mountain on the tokasitna river
right next to the Toca sit in the
glacier
anyway I took all the specs for these
unbuilt cities and I built them in a 3D
environment and then uploaded them as
mobile augments where they were supposed
to be built
and then
I hired a bunch of Alaskan authors to
write science fiction set in those
cities
and that's what actually started a way
bigger world of of World building
so uh there was seven or eight books
written for this project we ended up
doing a museum show of it in Homer so we
had all these books for sale I think we
only printed five or six of them uh
they range in in topic and style this
book right here dirigibles have done
only three Dome cities is a historical
account
of the cities this is Arctic City
Seward success
in Denali City
in a history of Dome City proposals in
Alaska in the Arctic or the circumpolar
North why people would have built them
there's a lot of odd things that come
into play looking at this
um
one of the big things is that
well to discuss the cities I I drew a
binary to to write this essay and so I
looked at transhumanism in literary Punk
or cyberpunk philosophy and kind of
looked at the differences between those
two and the idea of building a
futuristic world because those were
the thought process is when these cities
were built so
transhumanist philosophy saw all these
things as a way of moving into the into
a Utopia of the future where everybody's
got
um you know implants and living the
perfect kind of life
and then cyberpunk is much more
post-apocalyptic a little
a little darker
but a lot of the people say uh William
Gibson or Timothy Leary or Buckminster
Fuller or fm2030 they all had very
different reasons for why they wrote
things and they all had
uh wildly fascinating philosophies that
didn't necessarily line up with the the
reality of the world we live in
anyway um so this was just one of the
books a lot of it it it's honestly it's
an artist book it's not meant to be a
big philosophical Tome on anything just
sort of a history and then a look at why
we're building but what got super
fascinating was in dirigibles of Denali
the 10 authors that built science
fiction stories in the cities and I just
asked 10 Alaskan authors I liked I
didn't tell them to write a story in a
specific City I just told them the ones
we had so Denali city was designed by
Mike graveau who was Senator of Alaska
at the time it was a drape City it
wasn't or it had cleared Teflon drapes
on it
uh
so this is what it would look like on a
river and the the Teflon drapes would
have actually made something like a
carport which would have fixed the frost
line
Seward success was in indoor city with a
skyscraper just like a futuristic mole
almost and then Arctic city was
definitely the domes today and it was
actually supposed to be a series of dumb
cities that daisy chain
but uh the 10 authors all picked their
own things and they started writing
these incredible stories
you know some of the authors were
indigenous some of them weren't we we
created this Facebook group to help
everybody appropriately approach some of
the materials and one of the things I
really started seeing was that a lot of
alaskans didn't see
the Dome cities in this colonial
context like it wasn't necessarily white
people trying to live in the Arctic it
was actually Arctic people using Dome
cities to preserve
a world gone mad from climate change so
there was so much time has passed since
those cities were proposed till now that
the reality of a dome City didn't
actually bring Notions of colonialism
immediately what it did was it it
created
almost like an archive or a library
sense a lot of people thought about zoos
or or ways of preserving the world
um
stuff
a ton of really interesting fascinating
authors were inside of this and I
wrapped the project up we did the museum
show
and I had so many extra things and
everybody really loved working on the
project
I just started making comic book called
wintermute which was the same name that
I had
for the festival the augmented reality
Festival
I'd put on when I was working with the
Manifest AR group
so a couple things
comic books before I had kind of like
done illustrations or whatever for
augments and I had never actually
Illustrated something from beginning to
end I didn't really have say a drawing
Style
when
I think about drawing Styles I actually
spent a lot of time really kind of
fussing over it and inside of Alaskan
libraries there's a lot of indigenous
story collections that are all
Illustrated in a very similar style
George smart Illustrated a lot of them
uh Jay Leslie Buffa Illustrated a lot of
them in this sort of style
I didn't imitate it I just sort of saw
this as the
the Alaska design style like if I I
thought about DC Comics or Image Comics
or Marvel Comics
all of them kind of have a house style
that you can kind of recognize and I
thought of these illustrations that you
find in Alaska libraries is sort of the
house style
so that's when I started working on on
wintermute proper in in these Styles
um I had published winner one and
wintermute two
they were getting you know people seem
to be really interested in them the the
response from people was really great
um but I had started doing something
that I had never done before and that's
all the Care almost all the characters
were indigenous
indigenous alaskans and when I was
putting them together I was realizing I
really wanted to spend a lot a lot of
time
getting
the representation of these cultures in
a science fiction cyberpunk comic book
setting accurate or or not accurate well
done I wanted it to to feel
like it was like there was a lot of love
and care put into it so I tried all
these different things the in the first
character I really came up with which
was like a nominal character from the
dirigibles of Denali project oh this
superhero named cloudberry
um so I wrote the story Raven aid for
dirigibles of Denali had cloudberry is
one of the characters and then I go to
uh My Buddy Holly nordlam who's an
inupiah
conceptual artist up here and you know
inside all the friend groups
up here the artists that they get
together there's no secret on what
representation of Alaska would look like
if it was done well
uh a lot of white folks were very or are
very hesitant to jump into it because it
gets into a lot of cultural
appropriation or cultural property
issues that in you know well-meaning
artists
tend to not want to disrupt that so they
avoid it which to my way of thinking
avoiding it
is similar to not doing it well
if I was going to do a comic book and it
had only white
characters and it was set in Alaska it
would seem strange to me so I went to
Holly
and I gave her all the specs and the
stuff for cloudberry
and she just very honestly told what so
she wouldn't have heard things that
she's an expert in Inuit female tattoos
and she gives them and she knows the
history and she's well versed in all
this and it's part of her practice so I
asked her what kind of tattoos
cloudberry woman would have
and
so she actually just tells me quite
honestly like an anupiate hero wouldn't
use the word cloudberry she'd call
herself object which is the anupiate
word for it and
from there I just started collaborating
with her to create this character
and did the whole story and from there
it was the same thing as working with
dirigible as a Denali I I started
working with people to create the
characters to get a better
representation of every one of them so
we would design the characters together
how do we implement the language inside
the stories how do we Implement cultural
stuff inside the stories how do we make
a science fiction story that's true to
um a lot of the ways of thinking or the
ways of telling stories and the the the
structure of the stories became a big
thing too so it wasn't you know a lot of
Alaskan stories are very short in format
They Don't Really lend to this
novelization thing that's so big in
American and European storytelling which
is when you look at it
writing a novel is like this really a
tour kind of thing where one genius
author writes something all by
themselves and everybody enjoys that
singular thing and it's stretched really
long when
a lot of other storytelling Traditions
are much shorter in format they don't
have the beginning middle and end they
don't have the same
structures they kind of end in ways that
you wouldn't expect or they just kind of
stop instead of ending or they change so
the way I decided to go about telling
the stories
started following a much more non-linear
thing
what became even cooler is one of the
authors from dirigible's Denali Richard
Perry came to me and said I want to
start a group and we're all going to
make comic books together
and I was like that sounds super cool
you know what are you thinking
so
we all started working on
this stuff together eventually we pulled
in
malicious shagunov and Demi Maharis
uh Casey silver oh we created like a
nice little group of people that are
working and
we started pushing together chickalunes
is the one Demi maheracy's at the Baskin
from chickaloon he him and Casey made
this incredible
graphic novel for children set in this
fantasy world chick alone Richard
actually took his story from dirigibles
of Denali and we're turning it into a
comic book as we speak
um his story was uh kind of a Sasquatch
Yeti stories set in Denali City sort of
a POS post-apocalyptic story
um yetis or Sasquatch are called wild
men are hairy men in Alaska
um we're gonna move forward is about to
come out
I'm over my time but I do want to show a
couple things so wintermute three I did
with Melissa shagunov who's actually
Jimmy's cousin also ought now from
chickaloon
and one of the super awesome things that
we did
is the main character arit is denina
otna and she's on the autism spectrum so
I had started blending in my life as a
special education teacher into these
comic books uh the group of kids I was
working with at the time ended up
creating
the villain in wintermute three uh so we
published that about a year ago
kovitz kind of taken its its toll on the
practice but winner move four is about
to come out
this is uh some images from we're gonna
move forwards they're coming out and um
I also started building these indexes
inside of the comic books that are are
working a lot of augmented Styles the
first scientific information this is an
index of glaciers
index of space weather a lot of the
characters in the stories have Glacier
powers or space weather Powers one of
the characters the main character for
wooden force and throme who has
anthropogenic Powers power to control
human or human nature or man-made things
let's say
we had a few manifestos that came with
the winner mood
three had the first shared universe
Manifesto that Demi wrote inside of it
in four is going to have the fluka say
sauce the fish had soup Comics a little
description by Melissa on how that works
so
um those are my Collective practices the
winner moot are all available online or
through the banau street Arts Center
space we also have the fish head soup
Comics webpage chickaloonies can also be
found they're uh Studios called 80
Studios
uh the first book in that series is
available too
thank you very much
welcome back uh that was awesome Nathan
oh my gosh what an amazing history of of
work that you've gone through
um and Patrick welcome as well it's so
great to have you here I failed to
mention because I did not realize
earlier that those Publications that I
read in Nathan's about earlier project
is also in those books too which is
super cool so I have so much I wanna I
wanna ask you about augmented reality
and
um you know how this plays into into
everything
um but first and foremost you know
um you know something that is really
important you know for us a great area
is the acknowledgment that we are an
unseated oloney territory
um and that's something that you know
for anyone indigenous folks included is
hard to navigate
um and Nathan you know you with real
Elegance were able to collaborate with
the community in a really enrich in a
really rich way
um and you know I think that that's
something that we need more of is really
understanding you know and initiated
kind of inter action between between
groups
um you know it's there's I think that
you know you are able to support the
community and tell their stories in ways
that felt really authentic and true to
them and so I was wondering if you could
talk a little bit about that
collaboration and and you know how you
were able to form those bridges
um that really informed how these
stories took took shape
oh okay
ah I don't want to take issue with any
of the things he said I agree with the
things you said
but
I did that's just not the right way to
say so it's just it's just uh
friendships
so
in in friendships sometimes you initiate
doing something together and sometimes
they initiate doing something together
and if you don't have a friendship where
either one can initiate you don't have a
friendship
and
the the way these collaborations came
about was it was literally just years of
kind of talking about some of the stuff
in you know some of um
one of the people I talked with uh Maya
Selena gives uh filmmaker out of
Fairbanks and she was one of the people
that helped put Molly of Denali together
which is this incredible
kid show on PBS with uh uh at the Baskin
a dinner girl
and they just do so well by the People
by the culture by the languages by the
Traditions just all these things I mean
they go so deep
with elder and Community knowledge that
they get the sky color in certain false
settings in Ontario Alaska correct to
match the village accent of that person
that comes from this specific part of
Alaska why they would have a slightly
tweaked accent and why they would listen
to like a very different kind of fiddle
music it's just it's so well crafted at
that level with with um Community
involvement
so but that that's the long way of
saying there there was relationships set
in place that were friendships that
weren't friendships made for
collaborations they were just
friendships so they naturally were able
to flower
certain things because you didn't have
to work on building that familiar trust
with it it was just literally going to
them and say like I
totally want to do this how would I do
this in a reverse thing would be you
know them coming to me that way and a
lot of it
they some of them might get mad at me
with some of that it's just it's I don't
I think allyship is important for a lot
of people and I don't
particularly care about that thing
that's that's that's
um from my point of view that people
giving themselves brownie points for
something they should have [__] been
doing a long time ago anyway so it
really comes back to for me what we were
talking about earlier today which was
leading with love and connection and
care you know that really feels like a
protocol and a way forward that you know
will be able you know that will be able
to sustain these kinds of these kinds of
really loving relationships between
between one another
um
I wanna you know one thing that I don't
think you mentioned in the talk but
which is absolutely amazing is that not
only is this you know an output is a
project that you output but it's also
something that you worked with the
community to get uh delivered to every
indigenous School in Alaska
um to give kids access uh to these books
and to the AR experiences as well
um and I just think that's you know so
fantastic
um you know uh really amazing way to get
the word out about these things and to
you know create you know Bridge digital
divides in lots of ways
um I mean you know
um
because I I know that a lot of these
communities are are far-flung with not
great bandwidth
um you know
um and there's still a lot of
infrastructure work that needs to be
done to get everybody on the on the
internet that's the problem all around
the world
um and so I'm wondering if you could
actually no I wanna I wanna I have a
different I have something else I want
to ask you about
um you're about to get me super
political on this
no I was gonna ask you um you know what
you know as someone who is working
really hard to provide access to these
kinds of things to all different kinds
of people I mean you can go and find
these comic books online you can you can
get the PDFs and you can experience them
at home anyone can anywhere
um and I was wondering you know what
sorts of
how should artists and thinkers and me
you know different providers of media be
thinking about connection and be
thinking about providing access to these
different things and I know that Patrick
as well that's something that's really
important and a lot of your work is
making your work accessible to all
different kinds of audiences I mean for
instance with your work second front
um you know those are all free public
online performances that were really
driven by the community there in that
world
um so yeah I don't know I was thinking
that could be an interesting place to
start
so for me before I answered for Patrick
um there's still this little Anarchist
kid who wants to make
artwork in in me and and part of that is
everything should be free everything
should be open uh all the characters in
Winter mode that I design are actually
made we call it Alaskan open source
which means they're free for any child
in Alaska to use however they want as
long as they follow some very basic
cultural competency guidelines
uh because cultural competency is a big
part of having an open Society or a
society where we share with each other
you need to learn competency on top of
that uh when to stop talking
um when when to be a good
um listener doer ancestor all those
things
um
but it at the at the root of it for me
there's that little kid
that just wants to do something to make
sure everybody gets to have it for free
and I think I know it's um I kept on
thinking about like
actually the I know the community is
built through peer-to-peer exchange and
how actually well that is not
necessarily just a metaphor of the early
internet it actually comes from outside
the screen and it must come from
Outsiders screen poor inside the screen
in order for it to be reassembled and
re-shared elsewhere and I think that
something is very very powerful and it's
something that happens within this
project apart of course of the narrative
that it that it holds inside that I
think is very very rich and very
powerful and that needs to I know in a
way be
re-brought into life it was not
leaving I don't know I think that is
something that was just like
continuously living and growing and then
just you know condensed into into this
project I wish I had time to show more
uh dimming my hair is the oral
storytelling traditions in Alaska are
just so
long and beautiful and crazy exciting
but also a lot of people outside of
Alaska just don't know but um Demi with
his comic book
uh he just came up and we released the
first one but him and Casey had a whole
storytelling performance that they did
with it where they had this um this gear
they gave and they gave uh they're
called in it's called Yana Dia the the
legendary stories and um so I'm gonna
start crying uh Demi's dimmy's maternal
grandmother was Katie Wade she was the
Yana Diaz Storyteller of chicken Village
and she started the Yana Diaz School in
chickaloon and Demi's mother
Patricia was a Yana Diaz Storyteller and
one of the things she would always tell
him was uh
the
cultures it can archive and preserve
stories but thriving cultures make new
stories and she wrote a Yana Diaz story
uh fluke for him and he turned that into
a company he's got all these atna Manga
comics he's made of Yana Diaz stories
and he created a new yanodia story
called fluke sauce that they performed
where Raven uh steals
these um fish eyeballs
from us it's like this amazing story it
was the most incredible thing to watch
but this was going to what doorway
Dorian was saying because it was like
this huge crazy wonderful multimedia
experience and he was just doing it for
fun to go with the comic book when but
it was
it was a performance that definitely
felt like contemporary performance art
in our high art world but it also went
back 30 000 years easy
in that space of time you saw him touch
back to the end of the younger driest
when people were telling stories right
there it was
just absolutely magical to see that and
then the coolest part of all that is
Alaskan kids
well they're like watching us do these
things watching Demi do that they're
like flipping through it they're like
sagani guy I know who Raven is I know
who Raven is or uh I had a little girl
at one of the shows this stupid girl and
it was uh the OG Pig Mars Apple show and
she just kept running around the gallery
doing all the poses of the superhero
from the comic book and then she came up
to me and she was like oh tugging on my
shirt and she's like nobody's speaking
YouTube and these nice big victim which
is the Epic language and she's like you
need to book you've done I was like yes
I do
and I love you more than anything in
this world you are so incredible and so
that those little relationships is what
kind of stirred up
all the other things because it's just
it's super basic competent
storytelling is all it is it takes a
little bit longer the cultural
enrichment is completely worth it every
time so for every author or novelist or
whoever is making anything
what you're doing is trash until you
start working with other people to
culturally enrich what it is you're
doing and you're going to get to a point
within some of that where you realize
you need to stop being the one telling
the story
and you need to start initiating a
better conversation with yourself and
with the rest of the world and I promise
you even if you want to keep writing
novels and whatever
it will be better
the more you learn to listen more than
you talk
sorry and I'm talking a lot so I'm being
a bad example no you know what the one
thing I think that you really make a
great point of is it's like this this
this notion of friendships you know in
other words it's the matter of it's like
at one time you know I was I was doing
work
um you know going up to uh adac Island
where my where my father was uh living
for a while and then he came over to see
there was a project you did uh
um was it uh terminal Glacier uh um exit
Glacier uh terminal project which was an
amazing amazing thing and it's like you
know how far did you have to put out uh
sell your uh you know repeaters like
about like two miles or something you
know to get people you know there was it
the project was uh the fact that you
know the the exit the glacier has been
receding for you know you know for
hundreds of years and you know and and
you know we had a thing where you'd go
out there and and look at this thing and
uh you know you could see where it was
at in 1776 in 2000 and that sort of
thing it was it was it was actually
heart-wrenching and that sort of thing
and then you know but out in that time
you know we we spent time and got to you
know I got to know a few people and then
time out on adac you know really fell in
love with the uh you know no good
culture and that sort of thing and and
you know and you know basically studied
a lot of you know going back to the
storytelling you know you know I went
and studied you know there
um you know their their stories and you
know you know just the richest of all
that was uh really you know really
life-changing I think the thing is is
that
uh you know in this notion of rewarding
I think
um would you agree that maybe the idea
of the pandemic changing the social
landscape of everything and basically
creating new connections new strata and
that sort of thing and kind of breaking
old ones
um you know might be might might have
really made the world much more
um
um culturally fertile you know for
things like wintermute you know in other
words that you don't know it's like
broken apart old structures so the thing
is is that you know the the notion of of
this idea that you know this shared
Universe you know that that winter mood
is part of you know it was made maybe
more um
you know more feasible by
um you know just kind of the old social
protocols uh broken apart that actually
Bruce Sterling kind of said that broke
it destroyed the science fiction you
know and turned it into speculative near
future
speculation all right so what you're
what you're saying kind of reminded me
so I worked with um this young and I
don't know what you call like a rock on
tour he's like a mobile philosopher
David caravanaugh but we had a union
who was help who was helping us
I'm not using his name because he he's
he wants to stay uh Anonymous right now
um
but so we were meeting at this bookstore
and we were telling them you know this
is the character we have and he looked
at me he's like you know you're not
getting we never invented shoes so your
hero would have to be barefoot I was
like knew it we got it right here we
showed him the picture he was like
uh-huh and then he like leaned in and he
whispered
even if all the union people die
we will pick somebody and come to them
in their dreams and we will teach them
the songs
and it was kind of this
um
like uh
the way he was saying I can't get the um
oh anyway we were just we were meeting
with him to talk about how do we get the
best yunungan superhero story out of all
this so we were going through all this
stuff but that was the biggest thing was
uh the the dream the the United notion
of dream and and how that related to
everything but it was actually like
culturally that the dream was was much
oh man
but anyway that's what you made me think
of when when the union people will never
be gone is what he's basically saying
they're gonna live forever they came
from Forever the the the the stories in
the back that he was giving
um the other thing that I I just kind of
want to uh maybe pull out of your head
is the idea that you're talking about
you know you're the I think you and I
identify with the the anarchists or the
trickster and that sort of thing but the
and the one thing is is that the notion
between
um
I I don't know the you know the
anarchists and the subversive and the
one thing is is the idea of you know
that the yeah the nose the notion of the
subversive having a negative connotation
that I I think it's I think that's
absolutely false in other words the idea
is that someone you know the subversive
is someone who you know who
um you know
uh tickles the feet of the it exists
existing order to maybe take the full
risk kind of idea of of
um you know a better solution you know
and I think I think that's what you're
doing with with winter
oh
wow
radical sharing creates radical
collectiveness so yeah yeah very well
put yeah that's awesome I mean it's it's
it's all about you know it connects it
really connects back to again what we're
what we're talking about here like what
is the protocol how is it changing like
you know first step is really
understanding what the protocol is the
cultural protocol the political protocol
the the physical protocol I mean we're
all you know constricted by the protocol
of gravity for instance
um and once we can understand that and
see those borders then we can think
about turning it upside down you know
and I think the subversion is the next
is the next step
um you know there are certain protocols
that just flat need to be overturned
that need to be eliminated and need to
be Rewritten from the ground up uh in
ways that take into consideration all of
this interconnectedness
um and the values of Love of connection
of friendship
um these things which sound cliche and
sound sappy um I think are so important
for the success in the survival of our
species
you know what limit limitation breeds
innovation
that's a good one I think we're just
like hitting the Rhymes tonight that's
great yeah we are we're riffing
so I think it's a better Paradigm wait
even if it sounds corny to people
they could say that it's the same people
say safe spaces are coordinated and
using the correct pronouns or corny it's
it's okay that they think it's
coordinated it's not it's fine don't get
over it they they just need some
processing time absolutely you know I
mean you know what I thought one thing
that was kind of cool is like you know
out and out manifest AR and that was one
piece where we're putting stuff out all
over the world and it's like it was it
uh I think that there was like a big uh
you know a big um you know a big uh logo
type of uh all you need is loves you
know just you know you know stuck out
over the you know stuck out of the Ohio
River or something like that you know in
other words it's just you know but I
mean the idea of you know these uh you
know the of these imaginaries you know
that that these things put forth you
know that are able to take these sound
kind of unexpended uh yeah unexpected
unexpected uh pieces of joy and
basically you know
um make them you know give give people
surprises in in unexpected places that
change their lives I think
so I mean that really brings me to the
next thing I wanted to talk to you guys
about which was manifest AR
um which you're both a part of alongside
folks like Timmy gothio
um and you know it's a really bold
statement that not bold I'd say because
it's it's quite reasonable and you know
in in everything but I just want to you
know give a couple read a couple lines
from the AR art Manifesto
um you know if you if you go to manifest
AR dot art I dropped a link in the chat
you can read the full the full Manifesto
um which which both of you are signing
members of
um and you know
reality creates coexistent spatial
realities in which anything is possible
anywhere our future is without
boundaries between the real and the
virtual in the air future we become the
media freeing the virtual from a
stagnant screen we transform data into
physical real-time space
and I think you know there's so much
more and this is such a beautiful
document
um but one thing that I
think about a lot with augmented reality
is kind of the and this is this this is
It's kind of the perfect medium to talk
about in the context of worlding
protocol because anything is possible
with augmented reality you can change
the world any way you want but it's only
viewable through a phone screen or via a
projection or via something that may be
intangible
um and when you you know say you know
and if you if you you throw augmented
reality change a city to be full and
fertile when it's really Barren there's
still no fruit on the tree to eat and
I'm wondering how you you know and
that's really the whole point of welding
protocol everything's possible but we
have all these things in the way that
constrict and confine and control
um and so I don't know how do you
how do you tussle with that tension or
that kind of back and forth between the
possible and the impossible you know
through augmented reality
so I could answer I could answer I've
got an answer already sorry Patrick no
no no I'm
sorry so for me specifically I mean I
didn't own a iPhone until maybe three
years after I was making augmented
reality art like
uh I I I I I was very poor for a very
long time but I knew how to how to make
3D models in code a little bit uh I
never actually saw my work it was just
kind of this thing that I knew how to do
uh that being said augmented reality was
more of a style so I really like
starting with something real and then
moving it into another thing so like all
my work especially from that time but
kind of coming into now a little bit I
would start like with the real world
thing and then I would extrapolate a
project from it so the the Dome cities
that were proposed I went to that and
then I created a set of fictions
from that augmented out to the exit
Glacier project exit Glacier was
shrinking I went and created Five of the
Termini
um
at Exit Glacier it's just all
is an aesthetic style I just really like
starting with something like that a
factual thing
um
winter movement four starts with the
description of dog vomit plasmodia I I
really like that and the
winner mode three started with a
description of blood snow which is this
cyanobacteria that lives on glaciers
that is more pronounced when humans are
present and looks like blood and it's
kind of incredible and it smells like
watermelons and I like that and
from there we start into a story about
uh superhero with autism I don't know I
did so the Aesthetics of augmented
reality I really liked more than the
actual thing I didn't really care so
much about the the philosophy of the
hyper object and virtual space and this
and that
um it felt like just watching video art
from the 60s or 70s where like they're
on camera and they're like I'm on camera
I'm on camera
I I just the the
[Music]
the ontology of it was kind of boring to
me yeah I mean I mean for me I I think
you know I think what's interesting
about this is that you know if you think
about stirring's idea of the death death
of Science Fiction you know is that the
um and actually part of this is you know
why we started you know a lot of these
stories in the in the 22nd century was
because of Bruce Sterling's call for you
know uh for 22nd century science fiction
because of the fact that you had Blade
Runner you know was in 2019 you know so
in other words you had all these you
know science fiction had been collapsing
into just basically near future
protocols you know and so which is which
I thought was very fascinating and but
on on the other hand is that um you know
I like this idea of like a near future
proposition you know so that's one thing
I sort of like about AR in other words
the idea of sort of saying you know
rather than saying that you know there's
no actual fruit on the tree you know no
actual fruit on the tree but it's just
sort of like saying but there could be
you know in other words you know so this
this is this is this is this is where
you connect the dots in other words the
idea of it's almost like a proof of
concept in other words sort of like
saying guess what you know there's a
pair on the tree but there isn't one on
there now
you know it's like but you know there
could be you know it's it's sort of like
making that proposition of saying that
that yeah that actually brings brings
that notion into
a potential realization
you know the name you give it power yes
exactly exactly the same
like how
the power of naming something makes it
come into life at least in the I don't
know like the very essence of it and and
one way or the other ones that is
no like inserted or shared with someone
else and in their head that becomes
something very very different they're
already constructing a new world from
that
their own New World from that and I I
don't know I think that's something
that's very powerful and I think that
comes a lot with the oral tradition of
sharing or also literature itself
where in a way I've always found that
with the oral tradition what happens is
that no one imagines the same thing as
someone else tells you tells you a story
so whatever you are weaving in your head
is your own world representation and
universe of this whole
no atmosphere story or whatever someone
else is sharing with you which happens
also with literature but once you start
sharing a little hint of how this could
look like or how this this could work it
starts becoming something else right
because it's a way a point of connection
I suppose yeah the the [__] the gesture
isn't empty it's an invocation
you know absolutely I mean something
that you know last year's Festival just
shout back to uh gray area Festival
2020. the title was Radical simulation
and that was uh that was curated by my
colleague and Mentor Kalani Nicole at
transfer gallery and that's really what
their galleries program has been always
been about is this idea of radical
simulation and the whole festival
um pointed to this idea that by
imagining something it becomes a
possibility by giving something voice
and name and space make it something
that can be real and it can be
actualized
um and you know that's also goes back to
you know what then Mosey was then Maury
was talking about earlier this this
evening about you know dreaming about
dreaming being the imperative and then
Chiari talking about her proof of
concept work where the garments are
imagined and the materials made possible
even if the garments aren't actually
realized and that's such an important
thing to to do and to like root practice
in simply by Imagine something it
becomes something that could that could
be
um and that is something you know and
you know why I asked my question first
of all about possible versus impossible
is because you know what I wanted to do
was take that idea of radical simulation
with worlding protocol and make it a
little bit more complicated like we can
do anything but we can't do everything
um and you know because there are there
are constrictions in place and I think
that you know there's a really you know
I don't have any of the answers here
there's a lot of tension in between what
we can and we can't do because again it
we can imagine anything
um and that's been something that's
really profound and I think that you
know it really speaks to me a lot
especially through winter mood and
through the originals of Denali Series
in that you know you we have these
cities these beautiful architectural
imaginings that could have been but just
weren't quite possible due to all
different sorts of protocols that were
you know and and to me I think that was
always kind of the notion of the the
Multiverse uh you know protocol that was
kind of baked into into that whole thing
there was the idea that you know is that
basically exploring all possible pot you
know all possible combinations all
possible possibilities but the thing is
that but still they are all connected
you know and I think that was the thing
that was always really important
the they did a really cool job with
these by the way yeah they Nikki crushed
it
because
I was completely helpless I was too busy
to do anything it's just wonderful
Nathan what do you what do you what do
you think of the idea of
of the The Meta the metaphor of not the
metaverse but the Multiverse and the
idea of that being a being a um you know
a connective gesture
the Multiverse yeah
the probabilities
I'm trying to think of an answer I
hmm
I'm trying to pick the one I want to
talk about uh yeah like the idea of a
Multiverse a lot of the stuff is is kind
of
fun
ah
yeah
it's been collaboratively creating
stories with people in Alaska I become
less and less interested in some of the
tropes in science fiction because
there's actually way better
equivalencies for something similar from
a completely different point of view so
I think a lot of what the the stories
I'm coming up with for wintermute
um so what one of them's cultural
binaries tends to be this thing that um
that Colonial culture really really
enjoys this notion of good meaning
um
so for example
um it was a cold Dark Night
I am setting the scene for a story
that's involving evil
cold and dark in Alaska
is winter
and it means nothing evil wrong it
doesn't imply anything other than it's
winter time the the only weird kind of
thing would be say a warm dark night
that's a little strange because it's not
warm when it's dark
but the notion of evil does come into
play but it's not
based on things that are
that are cold and dark
it is the the notion in in South Central
Alaska is uh to Bear in winter
that is evil because it's something out
of place it's out of balance it's out of
sync if the Bear shows up in the village
in the middle of winter that's a chaotic
thing it's an unpredictable thing uh so
the stories tend to not be
this this European notion of Good and
Evil and kings and queens and
it's just it's it there's that's one
of hundreds thousands of Storytelling
ways and for me the way Multiverse or
apocalypses or anything is scatological
um especially if it involves cultural
binaries just tends to be a very
well-worn way of telling stories so not
that I'm making fun of them
but um they're brought up inside of
winter mood as red herrings like they
literally have no purpose or meaning
um they're stable lamenta they're
they're they're things spiders make
for themselves
right and you know one thing one thing I
just want to say real quick is this the
matter that I I don't want to suggest
that I'm saying anything like that I
think that you know just just the just
the conceit is the matter of just
hitting perspectives
yes you know that's all and I I think I
yeah I I think you know much more in
agreement with you is like this notion
of hitting perspectives
yes
but that being said the motive I love
the idea of a shared Universe yes a a
universe the World building together
that oh my God is the funnest I don't
like drawing comic books I cannot stand
illustrating I can't stand coloring I
kind of like writing a little bit it is
so much work and I have so much respect
for people that do it for a living and
make less money than I do teaching but
they're doing what they love anyway I'm
off the World building in a shared
Universe yes oh my God that's the best
thing ever yeah we're creating all this
stuff with other people
um when we have our through case Asos
meetings and we all get together and
talk about I'm gonna do this I'm gonna
do this uh
all these long
conversations with people in our group
in our little family about how we're
going to build this huge fantasy world
or what are we doing
that is the best part of all of it and I
am willing to sit down and draw comic
books to get to to to move through that
thing even though I at the end of the
day I feel like it's a waste of my time
to sit down and draw like some sort of
peasant
you know what when I sit down I I read I
you know I read I read the the comics
and that sort of thing you know which I
I just actually do again and again
regularly is that it's like everybody is
their own everybody is a universe you
know
um everybody is the Universe I think the
thing for me that strikes me about the
Multiverse is you know this this is
related to a quote that Dorian gave
earlier uh about you know I want to see
a world that has many worlds in it I
think you know kind of kind of thing and
the Multiverse is a really beautiful
concept because unlike the metaverse
which is something that is encompassing
of all the Multiverse allows space for
different universes to coexist and
connect to each other in ways that feel
right to them
um and sometimes you know in you know
connection is important but sometimes
separation is is important too and so I
think that structurally you know
architecturally it seems like a a great
model
um
we don't have a ton of time left but
there is
um one thing that I there's one thing I
wanted to ask you both because I know
this is a theme that runs through both
of your work and your interests the
cyberpunk philosophies that you
mentioned Nate and are something that
you know I've noticed really pervade a
lot of I mean myself included
um I'm a huge gift I'm a huge gibsonite
um and so I was wondering if you could
talk a little bit more about some of
those philosophies and why and or and
how they resonate through through your
work
cyberpunk specifically
ah cyberpunk transhumanist you know
all of that kind of stuff man that's
another big long super intense
conversation
um
so winter moot comes from William Gibson
from Neuromancer those one of the AIS
was Winter moot m-u-t-e uh if you if
you're from Alaska and somebody says
moot
it means people love it's a a suffix
that means m-i-u-t and you see that a
lot so if I said winter moot in Alaska
people think I'm saying the people of
winter
um
but as a younger person I'll explain no
it's an AI it's m-u-t-e from from
Neuromancer and so it was just kind of
this funny thing but m-o-ot is uh
in in the circumpolar north it means a
gathering so there's all these different
meanings on site on on top of the name
but it has a deep
reach to William Gibson's
uh sprawl trilogy but
cyberpunk for me the the big thing
no there's no big thing literary Punk is
is is is kind of the the stretch for me
it's it's I don't really care so much
for the cyberpunk post-apocalyptic
um
white guy that fights the corporations
with his tech knowledge kind of stories
those are fun and and I do enjoy those
but I have no interest in writing those
or participating in those but there's
something inside of literary Punk that
pulls out into a more all-inclusive
place and I've got to say you actually
switched my mind on the Multiverse so
now I'm starting to think about that in
in all sunshine and rainbows but uh
cyberpunk's just kind of cool and I like
the aesthetic and one day I want to have
shark skin on my face and I want to have
super smart my wife just said no to the
shark skin on the face
[Laughter]
it's gonna happen I'm going to be old at
some point and I'm gonna want short skin
on my face all right
that I take the gills you know that
would be great how awesome would gills
be and honestly it's that combination
between transhumanism and cyberpunk and
there was actually one of the
transhumanist philosophers
switched from transhumanism to cyberpunk
that was Timothy Leary and he switched
while he was in prison
uh he was in Folsom County Prison and he
wrote starseed and he's so he went from
um
he's kind of a fascinating person for
that super weird and honestly
transhumanism is an extension of
colonialism and cyberpunk
as dark as it is wants to fight
colonialism and when you go read
cyberpunk
literature
we didn't have they didn't have the
language back then he would have used
more of the inclusive language any of
them would have
if it had been
something that was just more part of the
Consciousness
um
the the one I go back to Rudy Rucker is
one of my favorite novelists in um
no hold on
am I getting confused here
was it Rudy Rucker who was the one that
wrote Ring World
well Nevin Niven
Rudy Rucker is awesome too by the way
wow hilozoic and um all those the the
Singularity what was it called post
Singularity those novels are great too
Niven he started off the ring World
Trilogy and I was thinking about him
because one of the art or anyway the the
the the ring world he started off with
the guys like having his birthday party
and he's traveling the world on those
moving sidewalks and he got it backwards
and somebody pointed out that he would
have been going backwards in time so
Niven just went in and they fixed
this the book to be accurate
so it was I the books are kind of trash
but like the fact that he went back and
fixed something when it was wrong
instead of just being like well it's
good
that's the thing that's dope about
cyberpunk
like oh I got the science wrong well we
need to go fix that
you know the the one the one thing that
I I was I've my mind has kind of shifted
a bit in in regards to all this because
of the my time in the a you know agent
minor West Asian Middle East and that
sort of thing is that is a couple things
is that I'm really kind of much more
kind of like into Stevenson and the
Baroque Trilogy you know it's sort of
like these you know this this sort of
like radical rev revisioning of of
almost sort of like almost like history
punk you know almost like swashbuckling
history Punk but the thing is like going
back to the you know like the um you
know Stevenson uh Stevenson Sterling
Gibson sort of thing
after living in you know spending a lot
of time in in Istanbul and living in in
the United Arab Emirates and that sort
of thing I could much more see
the sort of um you know the sort of
cyberpunk reality actually being between
Baku Istanbul and Dubai and maybe uh
Riyadh you know and then maybe going
down into you know North me north of
Africa and that sort of thing you know
then beyond
um yeah then then China and East East
Asia and that sort of thing because of
the thing is is that I I kind of really
after spending time in both areas I kind
of felt that East Asian was too too um
to uh um constrained by rules and you
know being in the Middle Middle East you
know is that well there are very
constrained rules but there are places
in which the rules are very squidgy and
you know that then and there's all this
high tech and there's there's money and
all these sorts of things and I could
see you know like maybe an alcoves you
know the the uh
um you know industrial area of of Dubai
you know that there might be you know a
skin shop you know somewhere in one of
those one of those things where you know
they're they're upgrading the neural net
and that sort of thing and then you know
and then going up that sort of thing I
mean I totally now see you know in you
know West Asia West Central Asia and and
the Middle East and that sort of thing
being a much more fertile you know uh
you know setting for cyberpunk than than
East Asia
that's so interesting Patrick
um you guys were just running out of
time
um I want to thank you both so so much
for being here this is amazing
um and it's so cool to hear you guys
riff about sci-fi together
um I love all those books too and you
know science fiction is just one of
those things that speaks to this idea of
worlding so well about imagining
different possibilities and not only
imagining possibilities but also showing
us possibilities that we need to avoid
um you know and I think that we see that
you know I'm thinking of the Neuromancer
Trilogy specifically where we see the
rise of the mega Corporation and the
control and the issues that that causes
and that feels so prescient right now
um especially in this moment
um in time but you know what I think I
think science fiction is dead I think
it's all near future speculation so
let's let's dream about the stuff we
want to have
yeah yeah that's a that's a great way to
that's a great way to close out
um before we go Nathan and Patrick do
you want to just let us know about any
other projects that you have coming up
uh that folks can check out
we're moving forward is about to drop
we're about to have our first trade
paperback so that's issues one and two
winner Mode's gonna be out before the
end of the year
uh our fish head soup Comics we got all
the stuff up there I would totally go
pick up a copy of chica loonies that's
very new it's super awesome yeah
mostly book stuff
yeah a lot of mines a lot of mine's
curatorial stuff uh I'm on the board of
the wrong biennial and there's a whole
bunch of stuff going on it's that my
partner got Nagina to Sabian and I are
doing our with our Gallery is doing a
piece called we don't fall which is
featuring uh 30 uh Iranian um designers
and artists and within collaboration
with uh Winona State University uh in on
the lands of the great Sioux Nation
where I'm at here in winter in Winona
Minnesota and then lastly
um and then I'm also uh we're part of a
pro a project called Tech expressionism
um which is going to have its uh annual
coming up opening up with the wrong
biannual as well at Tech specialism.com
amazing and as one final shout out I'll
say that Patrick and I are working on a
show at neem and Cyprus
um and that's how we met really
um that's gonna be coming out in
December so keep your eye on that space
I wanted I wanted you to say that
awesome well you know what guys that is
a wrap for day two of gray area Festival
thank you so much for being here Doreen
it was so fun to share this space with
you I appreciate your voice so much
Patrick and Nathan thank you so much for
being here
um we're gonna kick off tomorrow morning
uh at I think it's at 10 A.M